---
title: A Dramatic Response to Being Called Emotional - How The American Patriarchy Has Shaped Women’s Communication
layout: article
date: 2020-09-30
---
  
The Great American Experience is wrapped around watching grown men play a game of fetch (football). Alcoholic beverages and burgers are a must. Inappropriate behavior and irrational agitation too. The epitome of man in this country is yelling at a television screen full of dudes in tights, beer in hand, and whining like a child does when they’ve lost their blankie if someone doesn’t make a touchdown. “Hey honey, I’m sorry that I didn’t cry while watching that incredibly devastating movie about a man slowly losing his wife to untreatable cancer, but I did throw a fit when Tom Brady fumbled and cost us the game, so call me emotionally mature.” I have literally seen forty and fifty-year-old men break plates, chuck food, and start fistfights because of the outcome of a football game… and people call women emotional. Patriarchal views are so deeply rooted in American society, there is an intense double standard when comparing men’s and women’s emotional proficiency. Regardless of experience or ability, there is an underlying perception that women are less qualified and less competent than men. This gender bias epidemic has played a critical role in how women have adapted their communication skills.


Two years ago, I was watching football with my parents and eating this glorious bacon and aged cheddar burger (not like you would have expected anything else). However, my throat started to itch a few minutes into eating. It wasn’t anaphylactic shock, trust me, I’m deathly allergic to peanuts and my family frequently poisons me with them, so I would have known if I needed to jab my leg with an EpiPen. Nevertheless, I continued to eat red meat for another month. One night, I was enjoying this really fancy, really expensive, piece of steak when all of a sudden I developed hives in my throat. It felt like there was a golf ball stuck in my esophagus, I couldn’t swallow and could barely breathe. Ten glasses, that’s correct, ten glasses of water and one Benadryl later, I could feel the reaction start to subside. When I finally told my parents what happened, they didn’t believe me. “Sweetie, you’re being dramatic. You’re not allergic to red meat, you ate it perfectly fine last week.” Gee thanks parentals, you’re right! The hives inside of my throat have magically disappeared, I’m cured! Parents often think their kids dramatize things, and they do, but this situation is entirely different. Why would I fake being allergic to something? This boiled down to the stigma that women exaggerate things. Society has gotten so used to the idea that women’s reactions are irrational, even proclamations of life-threatening situations aren’t registered as serious. In order to convince my parents I am actually allergic to red meat, I had to show them the Benadryl wrapper and the hives forming on my neck. Not taking my word for it and asking me to provide evidence sounds awfully similar to a practice that girls succumb to when reporting cases of sexual assault… weird. The exasperation and urgency in my words were not enough to convince my parents that I can’t eat red meat anymore. I surpassed the use of language to communicate. The fact that I can’t speak my truth and have people believe me, especially on serious subject matter like having a food allergy, is a pointless consequence the patriarchy has instilled in society's mindset. Language is supposed to be universal, while obviously vast and differing between region and country, the majority of people communicate and express thought through language. However, women have to cater to the frail ego of America and adjust the way we express ourselves. Society holds this twisted, psychological superiority over us and our expression of emotions, in which we can’t rely only on words to share our experiences, we must perform for society before our encounters are registered at face value. 


Let’s go back to the game. A fit of irrational anger ignites inside men when the team they like doesn’t win. They don’t even know the team personally, the outcome of the game has no real effect on their lives, yet they break items, make messes, and even verbally attack people around them due to this rage. If men feel this entitled to an emotional outburst due to football, do you see how these behaviors could be applied to a feeling of entitlement to women’s bodies? Catcalling is so prevalent in America I would argue that it’s normalized in society now. I blame it on language being a masculine discourse, that’s to say, the rules and norms of language use in America are determined by men. This seems to give men justification to talk to us like we’re objects at their disposal and our only purpose in life is to serve their desires. Predators remove our identity by taking away our ability to use language. They invalidate us usually with a single word or phrase. Catcallers will comment on our physical appearances, our body types, they’ll tell us to take our clothes off, or sexualize any aspect of our beings, during a brief and random encounter. Men feel so superior to women, that within seconds of seeing us, they use language to assert their dominance and “ownership.” And in those crucial, fleeting seconds, men suppress our freedom of speech. We are now put in a dangerous situation of balancing if we should talk and what we should say. Do you stay silent and not make eye contact, do you smile and wave, do you say “thank you” and keep walking, or do you bark at them until they think you’re too crazy to get involved with? We have to carefully calculate how we’re going to respond because if we choose the wrong approach, we could risk our safety. In “How to Tame a Wild Tongue,” Gloria Anzaldúa reflects on being Chicano and her use of her native dialect, describing how she was discriminated against by other cultures that had a sense of superiority associated with their language. The consequences were “repeated attacks [to] diminish [her] sense of self,” and this ties into the frequent infringements on women’s security and violation of our identity by men dictating language use (Anzaldúa 80). This silence, suppressing our own thoughts and our right to speak, is devaluing us as humans. We have to conform to a version of ourselves that we’re not, we can’t speak our minds or be true to our values when we get catcalled. We have to repress any sense of self-identity in order to stay safe from these men who think they have a right to us. But this is not just a fight for social dominance, the patriarchy’s impact on women’s communication skills has become a political and institutional issue. 


Every aspect of my life is determined by my willingness to follow men’s orders. Be polite--don’t raise your voice, don’t speak out of turn, use respectful phrasing and tones. Be feminine--don’t use big words, speak slow, don’t have too much confidence in your voice. These rules we have to follow just to converse with others are meaningless; women have the same right to speak as men, it's written in the constitution, yet we’re still held to these standards by society. At work, if we don’t respectfully address our audience, we’re deemed rude. And if we interrupt someone, even if they cut us off first, we’re disrespectful. Don’t even get me started on the idea that speaking at a higher volume or speaking with confidence actually marks us as too emotional and hard to work with. How can we overcome this? Well, women can start to accept this silence as a form of resistance. Rachel Cusk described in “Coventry,” we have the capability to decide if others can break us down. Her parents sent her to this illusionary place in order to make her feel inferior, but later in life, she was able to overcome the negative association of being sent to Coventry, and found that being there, in silence, gave her authority. We must fight this “attempt [of the patriarchy] to recover power,” and let the suppression of language guide our ability to communicate using our facial expressions, body language, or anything that can aid in sharing our thoughts and feelings effectively (Cusk 2). For instance, instead of being aggravated that my parents didn’t take my word for being allergic to red meat, I should feel accomplished that I was able to prove them wrong by using other communication skills. Regardless of them not believing me at first, perseverance in communicating led them to hear me and take what I said as the clear truth. Taking away our security in communication isn’t fair, but neither is letting this obstruction ruin the premise of conversation with others; we ought not to let the lack of freedom to use language deteriorate our communication skills. Cusk alluded to the idea that we’re meant to feel inferior for a reason, so now we need to resist this idea that women are too emotional to be independently successful in life. We are rational thinkers, we use objective evidence to guide our decisions, we’re skillful at finding warrants for our claims, and we don’t act on a sudden thought. Men, on the other hand, cry when football games don’t work out the way they want. Perhaps the gender bias epidemic that’s riddled in American culture will never subside, but women are going to take back their power and reclaim their adapted communication skills as an asset, rather than as a means to appease the patriarchy. 




### Works Cited


1. Cusk, Rachel. “Coventry.” Granta, 29 Jan. 2020, granta.com/coventry/.

2. “How to Tame a Wild Tongue.” Borderlands/La Frontera, by Gloria Anzaldúa, Aunt Lute Books, pp. 75–86. 

  