---
title: Public Art, Profit Maximization, and a River Basin Covered in Pig Carcasses
date: 2021-10-25
subtitle: How China’s Industrial Revolution Has Triumphed Over Cultural Norms and led to Environmental Degradation

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder. 
image:
focal_point: ""
preview_only: false 
--- 
The expansive history of pre-industrial China had its social norms rooted in people’s appreciation for the world in which they lived. By this, the cultural competence that traditional art forms, such as landscape paintings, facilitated in China focused on the idea that man was not powerful enough to dominate the natural world and exploit its resources. Rather, nature and man established a society in which the natural world dominated humans. Only after the Industrial Revolution did the dynamism associated with production and profit lead to man over nature becoming the prevalent social contract. Unfortunately, the cultural standard for the natural world was not strong enough in the nineteenth century to oppose the endorsement of an industrialized, man-focused economy. The adopted framework of businesses in post-industrial China includes that anthropogenic activities, such as pollution, can be externalized on society for the purpose of maximizing economic progress, which has led to intense environmental damage. The current political and social movements in China are at a crossroads -- politics governed by economically-motivated lobbyists has allowed incidences, like in Huangpu River, to play out, while the social hubbub of public art is leading to individual and community empowerment models that are fighting for change within our systems to create a more environmentally friendly world. In this paper, the focus will shift from the social and political forces that are the reason for environmental degradation, to instead arguing that the adoption and modernization of art forms will empower society to fight for change for the sake of the environment and fix the issues that stemmed from the cultural adoption of humans being above all else.


In March 2013, over 16000 pig carcusses were pulled out of the Huangpu River in Shanghai in the span of two weeks. The destination of origin, Jiaxing, a large pig-farming province that’s upstream of the city, was responsible for providing 7.78 million pigs to the Chinese market in 2012 alone. Although the Shanghai Municipal Water Authority deemed the water to meet the standard for safe consumption, there were many environmental and health implications the residents located along the river had to deal with. The pigs tested positive for porcine circovirus (PVC), foot and mouth disease, swine fever, hog cholera, and blue-ear pig disease. Alone, these diseases are not known to be infectious to humans, but the means by which the pigs had these diseases is what was concerning. Because pork is the most widely consumed meat in China, the density of pig farmers is very high. In Jiaxing specifically, the pig farms were “small-scale enterprises”, but there was a large accumulation of them in the area (Ejatlas). These farms were also very poorly kept, therefore they were discharging pollutants in amounts exceeding the carrying capacity of the environment, which led to the facilitation of these swine-based pathogens and the ultimate death of numerous pigs. 


With a need to rid large amounts of carcasses, and weak regulations in place, instead of properly disposing of the dead pigs, many farmers began selling these pathogenic carcasses to slaughterhouses. This resulted in the meat being sold in markets for illegal profits. Once the health concerns began to make their way to public knowledge, the illegal trade of contaminated pork was cracked down on. This is when farmers began disposing of the carcasses in the water supply because it was more convenient. However, before the farmers were caught in their illegal trading scheme, they grew accustomed to using a feed additive in the pig’s diet that was a form of organic arsenic . The chemical components help make the pigs look more aesthetically healthy and viable to consumers from the markets. Arsenic, however, is identified as a human carcinogen, as noted by the International Agency for Research on Cancer. Therefore, when the contaminated pigs were sold in markets people would directly consume small levels of arsenic. When the pigs were dumped in the Huangpu River, the arsenic levels were small enough to not be detected by the municipality, so when it was deemed potable, consumers of the river would indirectly be ingesting arsenic. The clear environmental impacts were water pollution, livestock damage, and insecurity of drinking water quality, and the health impacts were unknown exposure to infectious diseases and carcinogens.


The political and social forces at play that interrupted China’s cultural appreciation of the environment led to this instance and others alike in their capacity for environmental degradation. First, climate change is largely anthropogenic. The consumption and production levels by humans are by far the largest contributor to the release of greenhouse gases. Human activities, like pollution and habitat fragmentation, can produce numerous stressors on aquatic ecosystems; chemical pollution by agricultural and livestock waste discharge can fundamentally change features of coastal ecosystems and the potability of clean drinking water. From this regard, the mechanisms by which the industrial revolution took precedence over the societal norm that the environment is its own sovereign body demonstrate how influential the argument for production was over the centuries worth of paintings, stories, and textiles that told the narrative of China’s appreciation for nature. Second, as the ideals of a production-driven economy settled into China’s landscape, they soared to rank number one in the world for the production of industrial goods like steel, cement, and modern technology. However, this adoption of the “polluter industrial complex” has led to the pollution of many natural resources; according to MEEPRC 2017, the groundwater quality for 60% of sites being monitored has been classified as poor or extremely poor. The event in Jiaxing is just one of many examples of how capitalist development leads to the degradation of resources for the sake of profit maximization. A desire for financial gains combined with agricultural production can lead to exporting pollution, in this case through the means of dead pigs, as well as dangerous products (i.e. the meat of the carcusses that had consumed arsenic being sold to market dwellers). Lastly, the expectation that increasing profits should be the ultimate goal of businesses, or the “profit imperative,” creates significant burdens for the environment and society. Social costs are all the direct and indirect losses suffered by the general public as a result of private economic activities; instead of the farmers losing money for the sake of properly disposing of their pathogenic pigs, they placed that cost onto society by contaminating the river water with arsenic and potential vectors for disease transmission.  


While these key political and social factors have been contributing to the environmental degradation in China, it is also by social forces that the people can fight back and demand a cultural reversion to pre-industrial ideologies. Specifically, it is through the modernization of public art that society can reflect on China’s current capitalistic culture and call for the readoption of the “nature is dominant to man” mantra. How is this being done? Cai Guo Qiang is an artist based in China that is using the installation of provocative exhibitions to create a social commentary that allows for advocacy that fights for stronger environmental regulations to reduce instances like the Huangpu River. Cai’s exhibit specifically suggestions the theme that “nature’s state of helplessness in the face of modern man’s relentless” is due to the inextricable connection between nature and man that has been lost on the current production climate. His piece, Silent Ink, potrarys the harsh reality that many of China’s rivers have been so polluted by industrial waste, they are no longer sources of potable water. This painting not only draws attention to the environmental issues at hand but also subtly connects the traditional use of landscape painting, where nature dominated man, to evoke a core community feeling in viewers that can be tied back to their ancestors. Art that strides the line between what our social norms are and challenging if that’s what they ought to be sparks conversation within the viewer that the social norms might not be in the best interest of environmental health. As such, China’s profit imperative and position in the polluter-industrial economy of the world should be looked at under this sociological microscope that examines traditional and modern art forms as calls for action to develop a new economy that is built on environmental awareness, not on profitization. While it is clear that the social an political forces of the Industrial Revolution sparked China’s expansion into creating a profitable economy over promoting ecological harmony, the social forces of traditional artistic expression of community norms are finally starting to become strong enough, with the aid of modernized agendas, to fight for the right of the environment. 

<html>
  <div style="text-align: center;">
  Bibliography


Nast, Condé. 2014. "A Chinese Artist Confronts Environmental Disaster". The New Yorker.   https://www.newyorker.com/culture/cultural-comment/chinese-artist-confronts-environmental-disaster.

"Environmental Justice Atlas". 2021. Ejatlas.Org. https://www.ejatlas.org/print/animal-husbandry-pollution-of-huangpu-river-shanghai-china.

"Dead Pigs In Shanghai: Failing Food Safety Regulations". 2021. Council On Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/blog/dead-pigs-shanghai-failing-food-safety-regulations.

Li, Chenxi, Kening Wu, and Jingyao Wu. 2017. "Environmental Hazard In Shanghai, China: Lessons Learned From Huangpu River Dead Pigs Incident". Natural Hazards 88 (2): 1269-1272. doi:10.1007/s11069-017-2910-7.

Jiao, Nian-Zhi, Da-Ke Chen, Yong-Ming Luo, Xiao-Ping Huang, Rui Zhang, Hai-Bo Zhang, Zhi-Jian Jiang, and Fei Zhang. 2015. "Climate Change And Anthropogenic Impacts On Marine Ecosystems And Countermeasures In China". Advances In Climate Change Research 6 (2): 118-125. doi:10.1016/j.accre.2015.09.010.

Jingjing Yuan, Yonglong Lu, Chenchen Wang, Xianghui Cao, Chunci Chen, Haotian Cui, Meng Zhang, Cong Wang, Xiaoqian Li, Andrew C. Johnson, Andrew J. Sweetman & Di Du (2020) Ecology of industrial pollution in China, Ecosystem Health and Sustainability, 6:1, DOI: 10.1080/20964129.2020.1779010

O’Connor, James. “Uneven and Combined Development and Ecological Crisis: A Theoretical Introduction.” Race & Class 30, no. 3 (January 1989): 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1177/030639688903000302.

Faber, Daniel. “Capitalizing on Environmental Injustice: The Polluter-Industrial Complex in the Age of Globalization.” (2008).

Neves, Vitor. (2018). The Theory of Social Costs of K. William Kapp: Some Notes on Sebastian Berger’s The Social Costs of Neoliberalism. Forum for Social Economics. 49. 1-13. 10.1080/07360932.2018.1481127. 

Visual art as a way to communicate climate change: a psychological perspective on climate change-related art: World Art: Vol 8, No 1. (2021). World Art. Retrieved from https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/21500894.2017.1375002?needAccess=true

</div>
  </html>