---
widget: blank
design:
  columns: "1"
---
<h1 style="background-color: #9999b480;">L2 - Think Like a Scientist</h1>
    
<h2 style="color: black; background-color: #dddde680;"><i class="far fa-calendar-alt"></i> September 15, 2020</h2>
      
<h7><i class="fas fa-book"></i> Chapter 1</h7>
      
<details>
  <summary>How does our everyday thinking sometimes lead us to the wrong conclusion?</summary>
  <details>
    <summary>Intuition: what is it?</summary>
    <div>an instinctive heartfelt awareness</div>
    <details>
    <summary>what is hindsight bias?</summary>
    <div>after hearing an outcome you then say you had foreseen that </div>
    <details>
    <summary>why does this happen?</summary>
    <div>when opposing outcomes both seem like common sense</div>
    <details>
    <summary>what is common sense?</summary>
    <div>describes what has happened; different from intuition which describes what will happen</div>
    </details>
    </details>
    <details>
    <summary>what does perceiving order in random events mean?</summary>
    <div>we find order and familiarity because random sequences don't look random</div>
    <details>
    <summary>why does this happen?</summary>
    <div>patterns occur often</div>
    <details>
    <summary>is this bad?</summary>
    <div>yes because we struggle with accepting random/chance events as such when they produce a bigger outcome; we have to sift reality from illusion</div>
  </details>
  </details>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>what is overconfidence?</summary>
  <div>we think we know more than we do</div>
  <details>
  <summary>is this bad?</summary>
  <div>if we are more confident than correct, this leads to issues with overestimate our intuition</div>
  </details>
  </details>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>example: why, after friends start dating, do we often feel that we knew they were meant to be together?</summary>
  <div> this is an example of hindsight bias</div>
  </details>
</details>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>How do the scientific attitude's three main components relate to critical thinking?</summary>
  <details>
  <summary>what is critical thinking?</summary>
  <div>clearing our colored lenses of bias</div>
  <details>
  <summary>how do we do this?</summary>
  <div>with skepticism, humility, and curiosity</div>
  <details>
  <summary>what is skepticism?</summary>
  <div>being open but not gullible by appraising the source and examining assumptions</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>what is humility?</summary>
  <div>being aware of our error and open to new perspectives through discerning hidden values</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>what is curiosity?</summary>
  <div>figuring out the "what? why? and how?" through evaluating evidence and assessing conditions</div>
  </details>
  </details>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>example: "for a lot of bad ideas, science is society's garbage disposal." Describe what this tells us about the scientific attitude and what's involved in critical thinking</summary>
  <div>scientific thinking combines curiosity, humility, and scepticism; amzinging assumptions, appraising the source, discerning the hidden values, evaluating the evidence, and assessing the conclusions is involved in critical thinking</div>
</details>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>How do theories advance psychological science?</summary>
  <details>
  <summary>what does a theory do?</summary>
  <div>explains behaviors by offering ideas that organize what we observe, linking facts with deeper principles to summarize</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>a good theory can...?</summary>
  <div>produce testable predictions, or a hypothesis, in which results can either support or disconfirm a theory</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>why can theories bias our observations?</summary>
  <div>the urge to see what we expect can lead to wrongly interpreting ambiguous observations</div>
  <details>
  <summary>can you give me an example of this?</summary>
  <div>the idea that Iraq might have plans to attack lead to us falsely finding an explanation in that it was in fact true, which lead to use starting a war</div>
  </details>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>how do we check biases?</summary>
  <div>report research with operational definitions of procedures and concepts. this leads to the replication of studies and can impact the confidence of finding's reliability</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>when are theories useful?</summary>
  <div>they organize a range of observations, implies predictions that anyone can check to derive practical application, and stimulate further research that leads o a revised theroy</div>
  </details>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>How do psychologists use case studies, naturalistic observations, and surveys to observe and describe behavior, and why is random sampling important?</summary>
  <details>
  <summary>what's a case study?</summary>
  <div>an in-depth analysis of individuals or groups</div>
  <details>
  <summary>what is the difference between intensive studies and atypical ones?</summary>
  <div>intensive studies show us what can haappen and offen suggest directions fo rfuture studies while atypical cases may mislead up with unrepresented information; we ought no use anecdotal experiences to discern general truths</div>
  </details>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>what's a naturalistic observation?</summary>
  <div>watching ro recording natural behaviors</div>
  <details>
  <summary>why is the benefit?</summary>
  <div>describes behavior and offers interesting snapshots of everyday life without controlling for all factors that may influence behavior</div>
  </details>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>what is a survey?</summary>
  <div>asking people questions</div>
  <details>
  <summary>why does response bias occur during surveys?</summary>
  <div>1. changing the order of wording can have major effects on how people express their opinions (aid to the needy vs welfare)</div><div>2. random sampling: every person in the entire group has an equal chance of participating as to represent the total population; however, you cannot compensate for an unrepresented sample by simply adding more people</div>
  </details>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>example: we cannot assume that case studies always reveal general principles that apply to all of us. Why not?</summary>
  <div>case studies only involve one individual or group so we cannot know for sure whether the principles observed apply ton a larger population</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>example: what are the advantages and disadvantages of naturalistic observations?</summary>
  <div>researchers are able to carefully observe and record naturally occurring behaviors outside of artificial labs; however, they were able to influence the everyday behaviors they knew were impacted n such environments</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>example: what is an unrepresentative sample, and how do researchers avoid it?</summary>
  <div>a sample group that does not represent the population being studied; avoid by random sampling so there's an equal chance of everyone in the group being picked</div>
  </details>
  </details>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>what does it mean when two things are correlated, and what are positive and negative correlations?</summary>
  <details>
  <summary>the more children and youth used various media, the less happy they were with their lives</summary>
  <div>negative correlation</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>the less sexual content teens saw on tv, the less likely they were to have sex</summary>
  <div>positive correlation</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>the longer children were breastfed, the greater their later academic achievement</summary>
  <div>positive correlation</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>the more income rose among a sample of poor families, the fewer psychiatric symptoms their children experienced</summary>
  <div>negative correlation</div>
  </details>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>what is regression toward the mean?</summary>
  <div>the tendency for extreme or unusual scores or events to fall back toward the average</div>
  <details>
  <summary>example: you hear the school coach telling her friend that she rescued her team's winning streak by yelling at the players after an unusually bad first half. What is another explanation of why the team's performance improved?</summary>
  <div>the team's performance was not their typical behavior. Their return to their normal may just have been a case of regression toward the mean</div>
  </details>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>why do correlations enable prediction but not cause-effect explanation?</summary>
  <div>correlation does not prove causation, it indicates the possibility of a cause-effect relationship</div>
  <details>
  <summary>example: length of marriage positively correlates with hair loss in men. Does this mean that marriage cause men to lose their hair?</summary>
  <div>in this case, as in many cases, a third factor explains the correlation: golden anniversaries and baldness both accompany aging</div>
  </details>
</details>
<details> 
  <summary>what are the characteristics of experimentation that make it possible to isolate cause and effect?</summary>
  <details>
  <summary>how can researchers isolate effects of multiple factors?</summary>
  <div>manipulating the factor of interest is the experimental group and holding a controlling factor is the control group</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>what is a double-blind procedure?</summary>
  <div>neigher participants nor those who administer the drug and collect the data knows who gets what; the placebo effect is well documented to relive pain, depression, and anxiety</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>what are the different variables?</summary>
  <div>the independent variable is manipulated, the dependent variable is measured and may change when the independent variable is manipulated, and confounding variables are other variables that may produce an effect</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>example: what measures do researchers use to prevent the placebo effect from confusing their results?</summary>
  <div>double-blind studies</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>example: by using random assignment, researches are able to control for x, which are other factors besides the independent variable that may influence research results</summary>
  <div>confounding variables</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>double-blind procedure</summary>
  <div>controls for the placebo effect</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>random sampling</summary>
  <div>helps researchers generalize from a small set of survey responses to a larger population</div>
  </details>
  <details>
  <summary>random assignment</summary>
  <div>helps minimize preexisting differences between experimental and control groups</div>
  </details>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>why do psychologists study animals, and what ethical guidelines safeguard human and animal research participants? how do human values influence psychology?</summary>
  <details>
  <summary>how are animal and human research participants protected?</summary>
  <div>animal protection legislation and local ethics committees serve to proett animal and human welfare. At universities, institution review boards screen s=research proposals. ethical principles developed by international psychology organizations urge researchers using humans participants to obtain informed consent to protect them from harm and discomfort</div>
  </details>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>how do we describe data using three measures of central tendency, and what is the relative usefulness of the two measures of variation?</summary>
  <details>
  <summary>the average distribution of scores is the A. the score that shows up the most often is the B. the score right in the middle of a distribution is the C. we determine how much scores vary around the average in a way that includes information about the D of scores by using the E formula.</summary>
  <div>mean; mode; median; range; standard deviation</div>
  </details>
</details>
<details>
  <summary>how do we know whether an observed difference can be generalized to other populations?</summary>
  <details>
  <summary>A statistics summarize data, while B statistics determine is data can be generalized to other populations</summary>
  <div>descriptive; inferential</div>
  </details>
</details>

<style>
details>*{
  margin-left: 2em;
}
details div{
  margin-left: 4em;
}
</style>